GENETICS-2021-304760
Efficient ancestry and mutation simulation with msprime 1.0

Dear Dr. Kelleher:

Three experts in the field have reviewed your manuscript, and I have read it as well. I am pleased to inform you that, with minor revisions, it is potentially suitable for publication in GENETICS. However, the reviewers have comments and concerns that need to be addressed in a revised manuscript. You can read their reviews at the end of this email.

It is most important that you address the following in your resubmission: Improve the structure and focus of the main body of the manuscript. This should include moving a significant portion of the material to appendices or supplemental material, and adding an up-front summary of the main new features of msprime (relative to the 2016 paper).

If you intend to resubmit, please let the editorial office know approximately how long you expect to need for revisions. Upon resubmission, please include a detailed response to the reviewer's comments and to the concerns expressed above.

Additionally, please ensure that your resubmission is formatted for GENETICS. https://academic.oup.com/genetics/pages/general-instructions


Sincerely,

Sharon Browning
Associate Editor
GENETICS

Approved by:
Paul Sternberg
Senior Editor
GENETICS

--------------------------------------------------------------------


Reviewer #1 (Comments for the Authors (Required)):

Simulation is a vital part of population genetics, and msprime has quickly become a crucial tool for many researchers. msprime was first presented in a publication in 2016, where the main focus was the use of "sparse trees" and "coalescence records" to greatly increase the efficiency and practicality of large coalescent simulations. In this new manuscript, the authors introduce a new version of the software, with this manuscript ""focusing on the aspects that are either new for this version, or in which our approach differs significantly from classical methods."

Since 2016, msprime has gained popularity not only due to its computational efficiency, but also for its software development style with well-documented features, development guidelines, and ever-growing capabilities. The extensive author list shows how the community around msprime and associated programs has grown over the last five years. The current manuscript has a huge number of citations (I count ~178!), generally representing a willingness to engage with a broad spectrum of the adjacent scientific community.

The manuscript covers many features of the 1.0 version of msprime including at least (my list and organization):

Software / API / innovations:
Clear separations of ancestry and mutation simulations
Improved methods for downstream analyses
Integration with other software including other simulators
Estimating run times of sim_ancestry
ARG recording
Specific API for specifying demographic histories
Software development model

Implementations of external methods:
Selective sweeps
Instantaneous bottlenecks
Multiple merger coalescents
Discrete time Wright-Fisher
Gene conversion
Mutation models

As well as benchmarks against other software implementations.

The manuscript is well written and comprehensive - I do not find any major deficiencies. This manuscript handles a wide range of topics with a high degree of clarity. And I find the manuscript certainly reaches the criteria "... tools of interest to a wide range of geneticists" and so is a good fit as an investigation within the "Methods, Technology, & Resources" subject.

However, I do think it would be possible to increase the clarity and usefulness of the manuscript with some relatively small changes in organization.

As, is, the manuscript lacks a simple overview of the new capabilities of version 1.0. Instead these are described in separate sections. The manuscript might benefit from a short summary and or table of the software's basic capabilities, API innovations, new functionality, etc. This may also provide a way to structure the larger flow of the paper, which currently seems to touch on the different topics in a somewhat random order.

Generally, I found the figures and examples appropriate and well done. However, I think they could benefit from more cohesive presentations and descriptions. I will provide a number of examples - figure 3 and figure 4 present running times of various aspects of msprime, but present similar data in different ways. In Figure 3, the data points are not presented directly, while they are present on Figure 4. And based on the descriptions sometimes replicates are summed over (Figure 7) or averaged over (Figure 8?) to determine the values on the y-axis. Figure 3 clearly specifies sim_mutations as the input for the benchmark, while for most other figures (e.g. 4) it frequently just says something like "running time for msprime." Sometimes only population-size scaled rates are provided in descriptions (e.g Figure 5 and 7) while in others both scaled and absolute sizes are provided. Sometimes "samples" are described to be diploid (figure 1) or sometime haploid (Figure 3), but other times the ploidy is left implied (e.g Figure 4). Sometimes the population size is referred to "effective population size" (e.g Figure 4) and other times just "population size" (Figure 3). More consistency in these simulations, descriptions, and figures could add clarity to the presentation.
I did find the lack of a disk storage benchmark an interesting choice, as this aspect of the software is highlighted in the introduction but is not present in the manuscript.
The algorithmic details of the simulations and methods are generally not included in the current manuscript (with some presented in the supplement, and some available in the 2016 paper), and are left for citations. I think this decision serves the manuscript well otherwise it would likely become unwieldy.

Figure comments
Figure 2
I think it could be made more clear that the genotype matrix is not part of the set of tables.
Figure 4
It is not clear if these two plots present all the data used for the quadratic fits, or if these data continue outside of the plots.
Samples are described, but not their ploidy, are they haploids or diploid?
From the plots here, it is not clear if the quadratic relationship holds for sample sizes << 1000. I suggest this figure should also include a smaller sample size, (eg n=10)
Figure 5
I suggest including the absolute Ne and gc rates be included in the legend, in addition to the scaled rate.
Figure 7
Why is an order of magnitude lower recombination rate used here than in other examples? This choice seems arbitrary and makes it difficult to relate these benchmarks results to any others in the paper.
Samples are diploid or haploid?
I would suggest the absolute Ne and s rates be included in the legend, in addition to the scaled rate.
Figure 8
Averaged points are referenced but not shown "Each point...". The plot could be more clear where the data points are and where the lines are interpolating between data points.
Because of how the simulations were described and plotted, I found it awkward to try to compare the running time of the DTWF and coalescent models, even if this was not the purpose of the current figure.
The figure says "to ensure we are measuring" I would suggest changing the text to "with a goal of measuring".


Individual line comments
Line 142 - what is the "msp" program? Is this a command line version?
Line 370 - the text here makes it sound like Kelleher et al (2016) makes a statement relating eq. 1, but the Hein et al (2004) is not cited in the Keleher et al (2016).
Line 370 - population size(s)
Line 420 - Despite the long description, I was not able to follow how the previous paragraph implies that "work is spread out relatively evenly on the coalescent time scale"
Line 422 - There is no context to what is meant by "large" or "small" here - is 2 or 10 or 10000 "large".
Line 606 - something goes wrong with the line numbering here.
Line 607 - The equations for the allele frequencies during sweeps seem slightly out of place as (I assume) these are not novel to msprime. There are many places where more details could be provided about methods discussed here, but in other cases the equations are left for the supplement or other papers.



Reviewer #2 (Comments for the Authors (Required)):

Kelleher and colleagues present the 1.0 version of 'msprime', the leading coalescent simulator which is built upon a highly memory- and time-efficient data structure, introduced by the lead author, which supports exact simulation under the coalescent model with recombination.

In addition to being highly efficient, the software engineering of msprime is of the highest quality. The program includes extensive unit and validation tests, and offers an API that simplifies worksflows and reduces the inefficiency and sources of error associated with large intermediate text files.

Kelleher has made every effort to engage with the community, with the result that msprime now support many specialized features that have been contributed by other developers. This has the important benefit of reducing the chances that this software will lack support in future.

In short, this is an admirable project, and a shining example of successful academic software development.

The paper itself however is less polished. It is very long (37 pages / 1200 lines without appendix), mostly because it is in places overly detailed, and seems to err on the side of completeness rather than conciseness or clarity. For instance, lines 160-177 describe the data structure in some detail, while this is published information. Line 192 remarks that "storage space is dramatically reduced", and goes on to make this more precise and point out some (fairly obvious) advantages in lines 193-202. As another example, line 301-4 states that "Simulating mutations ... is efficient" and refers to Fig 3 for evidence. The rest of the section (304-319) details a number of examples shown in Fig 3 that do not add much to the story. As a third example, in the recombination section after useful comparisons with other approaches, line 354 states that the proposed algorithm is still quadratic in the recombination rate. The long section from line 354 to 426 details the algorithmic reasons, and use various analytic approximations and simulations to support this. This material is of interest only to a few algorithm developers, and I would imagine it would be better placed in an appendix, with the key observations summarized in the main text.

Another feature of the current paper is that a number of topics return several times with minor variations. This is particularly true for algorithmic efficiency, and the API, both of which are discussed multiple times. It is of course true that algorithmic efficiency is the major distinguishing feature of msprime; nevertheless, the focus of the current paper seems to be the rich feature set, and the software development model, as well as the various APIs that allow for a more integrated and less error prone workflow. I would suggest to introduce separate sections for algorithmic efficiency and the API, and discuss the various features (as you do now) in their own separate section, but focus on these features from a user's rather than a developer's perspective.

Occasionally the paper reads more like documentation than a paper, such as when the Demography class is introduced and several associated functions are mentioned - this is not relevant for a paper in my opinion.

The section about the development model is interesting - very few papers include such a section, and indeed I think this is one of the stand-out features of this project that it is so successfully supported by many contributors. My only suggestion here is to remove the listing of number of lines of code - this is a very questionable proxy for quality or quantity of work, and the work is impressive as it is.




Reviewer #3 (Comments for the Authors (Required)):

This manuscript introduces a simulation tool, msprime version 1.0, and describes features, additions, and performance of the simulator relative to the earlier msprime software.
I will begin by saying that I believe all researchers in population genomics who use simulations have appreciated the quality work that has been previously done in the msprime sphere. The contributions proposed here clearly improve on a number of features, and that of course has value.

However, I did not find this work to be appropriate for Genetics, and would rather view it as more appropriate for a journal like Bioinformatics. The fundamental reason is that this basically appears to perform old functionalities faster, and the added functionalities are modest. Again, both are valuable, but this work doesn't address much larger biological / statistical inference problems that are in need of development in this area, which could justify publication in a journal like Genetics.

Specifically, the need of the field is really to simulate more realistic models in a coalescent framework, rather than the slower forward-in-time choice that stands as the only option presently. For example, the practical use of a tool that only simulates strictly neutral histories, or histories with the addition of positive selection, is likely rather limited empirically. By which I mean, the functional regions of a genome of course experience purifying selection , but there is growing appreciation of the fact that this may result in background selection effects that may be widespread across the genomes of many species. In order for the strictly neutral demographic simulations to be of value, one must identify genomic regions that are not only neutral but are also unaffected by selection at linked sites. In a great many organisms, such regions may well not exist at all; in terms of commonly studied species, these regions may only exist in a handful of large, coding-sparse vertebrate and plant genomes (though, even if these regions exist, they are not necessarily easy to identify, or sufficiently large to perform neutral demographic estimation).
I note that the manuscript avoids any mention or discussion of this problem, and avoids any citations that quantify this issue, but the neglect doesn't alleviate the problem. The authors should really consider, discuss, and utilize the following work carefully in this regard:

Lohmueller et al. 2011. Natural selection affects multiple aspects of genetic variation at putatively neutral sites across the human genome. PLOS Genetics.

Comeron. 2014. Background selection as baseline for nucleotide variation across the Drosophila genome. PLOS Genetics.

Elyashiv et al. 2016. A genomic map of the effects of linked selection in Drosophila. PLOS Genetics.

Comeron. 2017. Background selection as a null hypothesis in population genomics: insights and challenges from Drosophila studies. PTRSB.

Pouyet et al. 2018. Background selection and biased gene conversion affect more than 95% of the human genome and bias demographic inference. eLife.

Torres et al. 2018. Human demographic history has amplified the effects of background selection across the genome. PLOS Genetics.

Campos & Charlesworth. 2019. The effects on neutral variability of recurrent selective sweeps and background selection. Genetics.

Jensen et al. 2019. The importance of the neutral theory in 1968 and 50 years on: a response to Kern and Hahn 2018. Evolution.

Castellano et al. 2020. Impact of mutation rate and selection at linked sites on DNA variation across the genomes of humans and other Homininae. GBE.

Torres et al. 2020. The temporal dynamics of background selection in nonequilibrium populations. Genetics.

Johri et al. 2021. The impact of purifying and background selection on the inference of population history: problems and prospects. MBE.

Murphy et al. 2021. Broad-scale variation in human genetic diversity levels is predicted by purifying selection on coding and non-coding elements. bioRxiv.


Relatedly, for the simulations of positive selection, while it has certainly been common practice in the field for a few decades, it is rather odd to model a single positively selected site on a background of all other neutral sites. Positive selection may act on mutations in functional regions, and functional regions will be largely shaped by purifying selection. Furthermore, the Hill-Robertson effects between the modeled positively selected mutation and the neglected array of negatively selected mutations is often non-trivial. In that sense, the positive selection model is probably only of empirical relevance in organisms with something approaching free recombination (to eliminate such linkage effects), as in perhaps HIV or the like. But of course, these sorts of organisms tend to have small, coding-dense genomes and experience very strong selective pressures, thus returning to the first problem mentioned above that regions free of background selection effects may not exist in the first place.


In summary, I believe this to be a nice software addition that belongs as a Note in a bioinformatics journal. The software solution that would represent an important biological advance for Genetics would involve simulating more realistic models as discussed above (as forward simulators are currently capable of doing), but at a fast enough rate to be applicable to large-scale simulation-based genomic inference.




Associate Editor Comments:

